The President:
A year ago, when I took office in the midst of the worst
recession since the
Great Depression,
I promised you two things.
The first was that there
would be better days ahead.
And the second was that the
road to recovery would be long,
and sometimes bumpy.
That was brought
home again yesterday.
We learned that in November, our
economy saw its first month of
job gains in nearly two years -- but last month, we lost more
than we gained.
Now, we know that no
single month makes a trend,
and job losses for the final
quarter of 2009 were one-tenth
of what they were in
the first quarter.
But until we see a trend of
good, sustainable job creation,
we will be relentless in our
efforts to put America back to work.
That task goes even deeper than
replacing the seven million jobs
that have been lost
over the past two years.
We need to rebuild our economy
in such a way that our families
can feel a measure
of security again.
Too many of the folks I've
talked with this year,
and whose stories I read
in letters at night,
tell me that they've known their
own private recessions since
long before economists
declared one --
and they still feel the
recession long after economists
have declared it over.
And that's because, for decades,
Washington avoided doing what
was right in favor of
doing what was easy.
And the result was an economy
where some made out well,
but the middle class too
often took a beating.
Over the past decade, the
income of the average household
actually declined, and we lost
as many jobs as we created.
Hardworking folks who did
everything right suddenly found
themselves forced to downscale
their dreams because of economic
factors beyond their control.
We're talking about
simple dreams.
American dreams.
A good job with a good wage.
A secure and
dignified retirement.
Stable health care so you don't
go broke just because you get sick.
The chance to give our kids
a better shot than we got.
And that's why, as we begin
to emerge from this crisis,
we will not return to that
complacency that helped cause
the crisis.
Even as we focus on putting
America back to work,
we're building a new foundation
for our economy to create the
good, lasting jobs and shared
prosperity of tomorrow.
We're making historic
investments in science and in a
clean energy economy that will
generate and keep the jobs and
industries of the future
right here in America.
We're reforming our
education system,
so that our kids are fully
prepared to compete with workers
anywhere in the world and win
the race for the 21st century.
We're fixing our broken health
insurance system that's crushing
families, eating away at
workers' take-home pay,
and nailing small businesses
with double-digit premium increases.
And that's what I'd like
to focus on for a moment.
After a long and
thorough debate,
we are on the verge of passing
health insurance reform that
will finally offer Americans the
security of knowing they'll have
quality, affordable health care
whether they lose their job,
change their jobs,
move, or get sick.
The worst practices the insurance industry will be
forever banned.
And costs will finally come
down for families, businesses,
and our government.
Now, it'll take a few years to
fully implement these reforms in
a responsible way.
But what every American should
know is that once I sign health
insurance reform into law, there
are dozens of protections and
benefits that will
take effect this year.
Uninsured Americans with
a pre-existing illness or
condition will finally be able
to purchase coverage they can afford.
Children with pre-existing
conditions will no longer be
refused coverage, and young
adults will be able to stay on
their parents' policy until
they're 26 or 27 years old.
Small business owners who can't
afford to cover their employees
will be immediately offered tax
credits to purchase coverage.
Early retirees who receive
coverage from their employers
will see their coverage
protected and their premiums go down.
Seniors who fall into the
coverage gap known as the donut
hole will receive discounts of
up to 50% on their prescriptions
as we begin to close
that gap altogether.
And every patient's choice
of doctor will be protected,
along with access
to emergency care.
Here's what else will happen
within the first year.
Insurance plans will be required
to offer free preventive care to
their customers -- so that we can start catching preventable
illnesses and diseases
on the front end.
They'll no longer be allowed to
impose restrictive annual limits
on the amount of coverage you
receive or lifetime limits on
the amount of
benefits you receive.
They'll be prohibited from
dropping your coverage when you
get sick and need it most.
And there will be a new,
independent appeals process for
anyone who feels they were
unfairly denied a claim by their
insurance company.
In short, once I sign health
insurance reform into law,
doctors and patients will have
more control over their health
care decisions, and insurance
company bureaucrats will have less.
All told, these changes
represent the most sweeping
reforms and toughest
restrictions on insurance
companies that this
country has ever known.
That's how we'll make 2010 a
healthier and more secure year
for every American -- for those who have health insurance, and
those who don't.
And we enter a new decade,
now, with new perils --
but we're going to meet them.
It's also a time of
tremendous promise --
and we're going to seize it.
We will rebuild the American
Dream for our middle class and
put the American economy on a
stronger footing for the future.
And this year, I am as hopeful
and as confident as ever that
we're going to rise to this
moment the same way that
generations of Americans
always have: as one nation,
and one people.
Thanks for listening.